howtos/arch-linux-installation.md, before:

### Arch linux installation

Arch linux installation using my personal preferences, for the official guide refer to: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Installation_guide

#### Prepare USB Stick

Download the image from this url: https://archlinux.org/download/

Find the usb stick by running the next command and make sure it's not mounted with ```lsblk```.

```sh
ls -l /dev/disk/by-id/usb-*
```

Output Example:

```
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root  9 Oct  1 11:08 /dev/disk/by-id/usb-ADATA_USB_Flash_Drive_28B1915330860648-0:0 -> ../../sdb
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 10 Oct  1 11:08 /dev/disk/by-id/usb-ADATA_USB_Flash_Drive_28B1915330860648-0:0-part1 -> ../../sdb1
```

Run the next command replacing ```path/to/archlinux-version-x86_64.iso``` with the iso path and ```/dev/disk/by-id/usb-My_flash_drive``` with your usb drive, **DO NOT USE THE PARTITION NUMBER**.

```sh
dd bs=4M if=path/to/archlinux-version-x86_64.iso of=/dev/disk/by-id/usb-My_flash_drive conv=fsync oflag=direct status=progress
```

For example:

```sh
dd bs=4M if=/home/sergio/Downloads/archlinux-2024.10.01-x86_64.iso of=/dev/disk/by-id/usb-ADATA_USB_Flash_Drive_28B1915330860648-0:0 conv=fsync oflag=direct status=progress
```

#### Boot the live environment

Turn off the computer on which will be installed arch linux. Enter the BIOS, make sure secure boot is disabled, then select the arch linux installation media and boot on it.

Check this URL for a list of boot menu keys:

https://techofide.com/blogs/boot-menu-option-keys-for-all-computers-and-laptops-updated-list-2021-techofide/

#### Connect to the internet

If it's connected by ethernet, skip this step. For Wi-Fi user run ```iwctl```.

To list the Wi-Fi devices run the next command.

```sh
[iwd]# device list
```

It should list the devices, for example ```wlan0```.

The next step is to scan networks, run:

```sh
[iwd]# station wlan0 scan
```

List available networks:

```sh
[iwd]# station wlan0 get-networks
```

Connect to a network

```sh
[iwd]# station name connect SSID
```

Exit from iwctl and test the network

```sh
[iwd]# exit
```

```sh
ping google.com
```

#### Update the system clock

Run timedatectl to ensure the system clock is synchronized:

```sh
timedatectl
```

Set the timezone:

```sh
timedatectl set-timezone America/Tijuana
```

You can find the list of timezones in wikipedia:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_tz_database_time_zones

#### Partition the disks

First, identify the block devices, run:

```
fdisk -l
```

Output example:

```
Disk /dev/sda: 447.13 GiB, 480103981056 bytes, 937703088 sectors
Disk model: PNY CS1311 480GB
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
Disklabel type: gpt
Disk identifier: B9D5E312-5297-4155-961F-4A1FE1D12339

Device       Start       End   Sectors   Size Type
/dev/sda1     2048   1050623   1048576   512M EFI System
/dev/sda2  1050624 937701375 936650752 446.6G Linux filesystem


Disk /dev/sdb: 465.76 GiB, 500107862016 bytes, 976773168 sectors
Disk model: ST500LT012-1DG14
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 4096 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 4096 bytes / 4096 bytes
Disklabel type: gpt
Disk identifier: FE3316B8-B3AF-4416-96F6-7F42C41A5562

Device       Start       End   Sectors   Size Type
/dev/sdb1     2048   1050623   1048576   512M EFI System
/dev/sdb2  1050624 976771071 975720448 465.3G Microsoft basic data


Disk /dev/sdd: 3.61 GiB, 3879731200 bytes, 7577600 sectors
Disk model: USB Flash Drive 
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
Disklabel type: dos
Disk identifier: 0xf9f63ac3

Device     Boot   Start     End Sectors  Size Id Type
/dev/sdd1  *         64 1953791 1953728  954M  0 Empty
/dev/sdd2       1953792 2291711  337920  165M ef EFI (FAT-12/16/32)


Disk /dev/loop0: 794.42 MiB, 833007616 bytes, 1626968 sectors
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
```

The SSD or HDD can be identified by their models and sizes. In this case the installation drive will be ```PNY CS1311 480GB``` which is ```/dev/sda```.

Use fdisk to create the partitions.

```
fdisk /dev/sda
```

The 3 partitions suggested by the Arch installation guide are the next:

|Mount point on the installed system|Partition|Partition type|fdisk partition type number|Suggested size|
|-|-|-|-|-|
|/boot|/dev/efi_system_partition|EFI system partition|1|2 GiB|
|/|/dev/root_partition|Linux filesystem|20|Remainder of the device. At least 23–32 GiB.|

In fdisk you can list the known partition types by running the ```l``` command.

Create the GTP partition table and the partitions with the next commands:

Skip the swap partition, i might recreate this tutorial later, currently I'm using a btrfs swap file instead of a swap partition.

```
Welcome to fdisk (util-linux 2.40.2).
Changes will remain in memory only, until you decide to write them.
Be careful before using the write command.


Command (m for help): g
Created a new GPT disklabel (GUID: E583A9B4-E664-46D7-AB73-0AF69A4380BB).

Command (m for help): n
Partition number (1-128, default 1): 
First sector (2048-937703054, default 2048): 
Last sector, +/-sectors or +/-size{K,M,G,T,P} (2048-937703054, default 937701375): +1G

Created a new partition 1 of type 'Linux filesystem' and of size 1 GiB.
Partition #1 contains a vfat signature.

Do you want to remove the signature? [Y]es/[N]o: Y

The signature will be removed by a write command.

Command (m for help): t
Selected partition 1
Partition type or alias (type L to list all): 1
Changed type of partition 'Linux filesystem' to 'EFI System'.

Command (m for help): n
Partition number (2-128, default 2): 
First sector (2099200-937703054, default 2099200): 
Last sector, +/-sectors or +/-size{K,M,G,T,P} (2099200-937703054, default 937701375): +4G

Created a new partition 2 of type 'Linux filesystem' and of size 4 GiB.

Command (m for help): t
Partition number (1,2, default 2): 2
Partition type or alias (type L to list all): 19

Changed type of partition 'Linux filesystem' to 'Linux swap'.

Command (m for help): n
Partition number (3-128, default 3): 
First sector (10487808-937703054, default 10487808): 
Last sector, +/-sectors or +/-size{K,M,G,T,P} (10487808-937703054, default 937701375): 

Created a new partition 3 of type 'Linux filesystem' and of size 442.1 GiB.

Command (m for help): t
Partition number (1-3, default 3): 3
Partition type or alias (type L to list all): 23

Changed type of partition 'Linux filesystem' to 'Linux root (x86-64)'.

Command (m for help): p
Disk /dev/sda: 447.13 GiB, 480103981056 bytes, 937703088 sectors
Disk model: PNY CS1311 480GB
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
Disklabel type: gpt
Disk identifier: E583A9B4-E664-46D7-AB73-0AF69A4380BB

Device        Start       End   Sectors   Size Type
/dev/sda1      2048   2099199   2097152     1G EFI System
/dev/sda2   2099200  10487807   8388608     4G Linux swap
/dev/sda3  10487808 937701375 927213568 442.1G Linux root (x86-64)

Filesystem/RAID signature on partition 1 will be wiped.

Command (m for help): w
The partition table has been altered.
Calling ioctl() to re-read partition table.
Syncing disks.
```

#### Encrypt root partition

Only the ```/dev/sda3``` partition will be encrypted. Run the next command.

```sh
cryptsetup luksFormat /dev/sda3
```

Enter YES and write a passphrase. Output Example:

```
WARNING!
========
This will overwrite data on /dev/sda3 irrevocably.

Are you sure? (Type 'yes' in capital letters): YES
Enter passphrase for /dev/sda3: 
Verify passphrase: 
cryptsetup luksFormat /dev/sda3  19.69s user 0.36s system 84% cpu 23.678 total
```

Open the encrypted partition with the following command:

```sh
cryptsetup luksOpen /dev/sda3 root
```

Once the encrypted partition is open, you can see it with the ```lsblk``` command.

```
NAME     MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE  MOUNTPOINTS
loop0      7:0    0 794.4M  1 loop  /run/archiso/airootfs
sda        8:0    0 447.1G  0 disk  
├─sda1     8:1    0     1G  0 part  
├─sda2     8:2    0     4G  0 part  
└─sda3     8:3    0 442.1G  0 part  
  └─root 254:0    0 442.1G  0 crypt 
sdb        8:16   0 465.8G  0 disk  
├─sdb1     8:17   0   512M  0 part  
└─sdb2     8:18   0 465.3G  0 part  
sdc        8:32   1     0B  0 disk  
sdd        8:48   1   3.6G  0 disk  
├─sdd1     8:49   1   954M  0 part  
└─sdd2     8:50   1   165M  0 part  
```

#### Format partitions

Format the EFI partition.

```sh
mkfs.fat -F 32 /dev/sda1
```

The root partition must be formatted using the mapper.

```sh
mkfs.btrfs /dev/mapper/root
```

Output example:

```
btrfs-progs v6.10.1
See https://btrfs.readthedocs.io for more information.

Performing full device TRIM /dev/mapper/root (442.11GiB) ...
NOTE: several default settings have changed in version 5.15, please make sure
      this does not affect your deployments:
      - DUP for metadata (-m dup)
      - enabled no-holes (-O no-holes)
      - enabled free-space-tree (-R free-space-tree)

Label:              (null)
UUID:               b6c7770d-50e4-41ed-b332-1b1517a891cf
Node size:          16384
Sector size:        4096        (CPU page size: 4096)
Filesystem size:    442.11GiB
Block group profiles:
  Data:             single            8.00MiB
  Metadata:         DUP               1.00GiB
  System:           DUP               8.00MiB
SSD detected:       yes
Zoned device:       no
Features:           extref, skinny-metadata, no-holes, free-space-tree
Checksum:           crc32c
Number of devices:  1
Devices:
   ID        SIZE  PATH            
    1   442.11GiB  /dev/mapper/root
```

#### Btrfs subvolumes

Mount ```/dev/mapper/root``` before creating subvolumes.

```sh
mount /dev/mapper/root /mnt
```

Change to the ```/mnt``` directory.

```sh
cd /mnt
```

Create the root, home, log and swap subvolumes.

```sh
btrfs subvolume create @
btrfs subvolume create @home
btrfs subvolume create @log
btrfs subvolume create @swap
```

Create the directories for the snapshots and the broken snapshots.

```sh
mkdir -p snapshots snapshots/@ snapshots/@home
mkdir -p snapshots_broken snapshots_broken/@ snapshots_broken/@home
```

Exit from the ```/mnt``` directory and unmount it.

```sh
cd
umount /mnt
```

#### Mount the filesystems

Previously the subvolumes root and home were created, now they need to be mounted.

First mount the root subvolume.

```sh
mount -o noatime,subvol=@ /dev/mapper/root /mnt
```

Create the home directory and mount the @home subvolume.

```sh
mkdir -p /mnt/home
mount -o noatime,subvol=@home /dev/mapper/root /mnt/home
```

Create the log directory and mount the @log subvolume.

```sh
mkdir -p /mnt/var/log
mount -o noatime,subvol=@log /dev/mapper/root /mnt/var/log
```

Create boot directory and mount the boot partition.

```sh
mkdir /mnt/boot
mount -o noatime /dev/sda1 /mnt/boot
```

Create the swap directory and mount the @swap subvolume.

```sh
mkdir -p /mnt/swap
mount -o subvol=@swap /dev/mapper/root /mnt/swap
```

In order to enable hibernation, the swap file must be at least the size of the RAM. To show the RAM size run:

```sh
free -h
```

Create and enable the swap file. In this case the RAM size is 16 GiB.

```sh
btrfs filesystem mkswapfile --size 16g --uuid clear /mnt/swap/swapfile
```

Enable the swap file.

```sh
swapon /mnt/swap/swapfile
```

#### Select the mirrors

Select the mirrors of your contry using the next command:

```sh
reflector --country Mexico --latest 5 --age 12 --sort rate --save /etc/pacman.d/mirrorlist
```

#### Install essencial packages

Install essencial packages by running the next command, remember to change intel-ucode to amd-ucode in case the computer has and amd processor.

```sh
pacstrap -K /mnt base base-devel linux-lts linux-firmware linux-lts-headers btrfs-progs sudo intel-ucode amd-ucode networkmanager vim man-db man-pages texinfo dosfstools ntfs-3g pacman-contrib
```

#### Configure the system

Generate the fstab file.

```sh
genfstab -U /mnt >> /mnt/etc/fstab
```

Change root into the new system.

```sh
arch-chroot /mnt
```

Set the timezone.

```sh
ln -sf /usr/share/zoneinfo/America/Tijuana /etc/localtime
```

Run hwclock to generate /etc/adjtime

```sh
hwclock --systohc
```

Set the timezone with timedatectl.

```sh
timedatectl set-timezone America/Tijuana
```

In order to configure localization, edit ```/etc/locale.gen``` and uncomment ```en_US.UTF-8 UTF-8``` and execute the next:

```sh
locale-gen
```

Create the locale.conf file.

```sh
echo "LANG=en_US.UTF-8" > /etc/locale.conf
```

Create the hostname file.

```sh
echo toshiba > /etc/hostname
```

#### Initramfs

Edit the ```/etc/mkinitcpio.conf``` file and add the encrypt hook.

```sh
vim /etc/mkinitcpio.conf
```

Make sure the ```encrypt``` hook is before ```filesystems``` hook. And the ```resume``` hook is before ```fsck``` and after ```filesystems```, this is necessary to enable hibernation.

```
HOOKS=(base udev autodetect microcode modconf kms keyboard keymap consolefont block encrypt filesystems resume fsck)
```

Then recreate the initramfs image.

```sh
mkinitcpio -P
```

Set the root password.

```sh
passwd
```

#### Set custom ACPI events

Edit the ```/etc/systemd/logind.conf``` file to customize the power button and lid switch actions.

```sh
vim /etc/systemd/logind.conf
```

Set the power button action to hibernate and the lid switch to do nothing.

```
HandlePowerKey=hibernate
HandleLidSwitch=ignore
```

#### (Optional) Create a user

Create a user with home directory and add it to the group wheel.

```sh
useradd --create-home --groups wheel demitroi
```

Set new password for the user.

```sh
passwd demitroi
```

Add the new user to the sudoers.

```sh
echo "demitroi ALL=(ALL:ALL) ALL" > /etc/sudoers.d/demitroi
```

In order to create the user directores install ```xdg-user-dirs```.

```sh
pacman -S xdg-user-dirs
```

Switch to the user and run

```sh
su demitroi
xdg-user-dirs-update
```

#### Install the systemd-boot loader

Systemd-boot comes with systemd package, so it's not necessary to install it.

Exec the next command to install it.

```sh
bootctl install --efi-boot-option-description="Arch Linux"
```

Create and edit the loader config file.

```sh
vim /boot/loader/loader.conf
```

Add the next content to it.

```
default  arch.conf
timeout  15
console-mode max
editor   no
```

Before creating the entries, use blkid to get the partition id of the LUKS partition.

```sh
blkid /dev/sda3
```

Output example:

```
/dev/sda3: UUID="8f0d30d4-1be6-4f7e-b9c1-4c4349cbdffd" TYPE="crypto_LUKS" PARTUUID="c293c947-881e-440c-b85c-859f19391b96"
```

Create the files of the loader entries.

```sh
mkdir -p /boot/loader/entries
```

Create and edit the arch.conf file.

```sh
vim /boot/loader/entries/arch.conf
```

Add the next content to it. The uuid is taken from the previous blkid command and the intel-ucode can be replaced with amd-ucode if the processor is amd.

```
title   Arch Linux
linux   /vmlinuz-linux-lts
initrd  /intel-ucode.img
initrd  /initramfs-linux-lts.img
options loglevel=3 verbose cryptdevice=UUID=8f0d30d4-1be6-4f7e-b9c1-4c4349cbdffd:root root=/dev/mapper/root rootflags=subvol=@ rw
```

Create the fallback entry, copy it from the previous file.

```sh
cp /boot/loader/entries/arch.conf /boot/loader/entries/arch-fallback.conf
```

Edit the ```arch-fallback.conf``` file.

```sh
vim /boot/loader/entries/arch-fallback.conf
```

Change the initrd line to use the fallback image.

```
title   Arch Linux (fallback initramfs)
linux   /vmlinuz-linux-lts
initrd  /intel-ucode.img
initrd  /initramfs-linux-lts-fallback.img
options loglevel=3 verbose cryptdevice=UUID=8f0d30d4-1be6-4f7e-b9c1-4c4349cbdffd:root root=/dev/mapper/root rootflags=subvol=@ rw
```

For more information refer to:

https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dm-crypt/System_configuration#Kernel_parameters

https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Power_management/Suspend_and_hibernate#Configure_the_initramfs

https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Kernel_parameters#Parameter_list

#### Create the initial snapshot

Once the system is installed, it's important to create the first snapshot to rollback to it in case something breaks.

First create the /mnt/btrfs directory.

```sh
mkdir -p /mnt/btrfs
```

Then mount the filesystem on it.

```sh
mount /dev/mapper/root /mnt/btrfs
```

Change to the /mnt/btrfs directory.

```sh
cd /mnt/btrfs
```

Create a read-only snapshot.

```sh
btrfs subvolume snapshot -r @ snapshots/@/$(date +%F_%H-%M-%S)
```

#### Post installation

Enable and start NetworkManager.

```sh
systemctl enable NetworkManager.service
systemctl start NetworkManager.service
```

It's recommended to see the next URL: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/General_recommendations

You can see my main readme for mor of my personal preferences

[readme.md](/readme.md)

Configure parallel downloads in pacman. Edit the ```/etc/pacman.conf``` file.

```sh
vim /etc/pacman.conf
```

Look for the ```ParallelDownloads``` option and set it to 5..

```sh
ParallelDownloads = 5
```

Commit message:

Add how to synchronize the clock in howtos

howtos/arch-linux-installation.md, after:

### Arch linux installation

Arch linux installation using my personal preferences, for the official guide refer to: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Installation_guide

#### Prepare USB Stick

Download the image from this url: https://archlinux.org/download/

Find the usb stick by running the next command and make sure it's not mounted with ```lsblk```.

```sh
ls -l /dev/disk/by-id/usb-*
```

Output Example:

```
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root  9 Oct  1 11:08 /dev/disk/by-id/usb-ADATA_USB_Flash_Drive_28B1915330860648-0:0 -> ../../sdb
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 10 Oct  1 11:08 /dev/disk/by-id/usb-ADATA_USB_Flash_Drive_28B1915330860648-0:0-part1 -> ../../sdb1
```

Run the next command replacing ```path/to/archlinux-version-x86_64.iso``` with the iso path and ```/dev/disk/by-id/usb-My_flash_drive``` with your usb drive, **DO NOT USE THE PARTITION NUMBER**.

```sh
dd bs=4M if=path/to/archlinux-version-x86_64.iso of=/dev/disk/by-id/usb-My_flash_drive conv=fsync oflag=direct status=progress
```

For example:

```sh
dd bs=4M if=/home/sergio/Downloads/archlinux-2024.10.01-x86_64.iso of=/dev/disk/by-id/usb-ADATA_USB_Flash_Drive_28B1915330860648-0:0 conv=fsync oflag=direct status=progress
```

#### Boot the live environment

Turn off the computer on which will be installed arch linux. Enter the BIOS, make sure secure boot is disabled, then select the arch linux installation media and boot on it.

Check this URL for a list of boot menu keys:

https://techofide.com/blogs/boot-menu-option-keys-for-all-computers-and-laptops-updated-list-2021-techofide/

#### Connect to the internet

If it's connected by ethernet, skip this step. For Wi-Fi user run ```iwctl```.

To list the Wi-Fi devices run the next command.

```sh
[iwd]# device list
```

It should list the devices, for example ```wlan0```.

The next step is to scan networks, run:

```sh
[iwd]# station wlan0 scan
```

List available networks:

```sh
[iwd]# station wlan0 get-networks
```

Connect to a network

```sh
[iwd]# station name connect SSID
```

Exit from iwctl and test the network

```sh
[iwd]# exit
```

```sh
ping google.com
```

#### Update the system clock

Run timedatectl to ensure the system clock is synchronized:

```sh
timedatectl
```

Set the timezone:

```sh
timedatectl set-timezone America/Tijuana
```

You can find the list of timezones in wikipedia:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_tz_database_time_zones

#### Partition the disks

First, identify the block devices, run:

```
fdisk -l
```

Output example:

```
Disk /dev/sda: 447.13 GiB, 480103981056 bytes, 937703088 sectors
Disk model: PNY CS1311 480GB
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
Disklabel type: gpt
Disk identifier: B9D5E312-5297-4155-961F-4A1FE1D12339

Device       Start       End   Sectors   Size Type
/dev/sda1     2048   1050623   1048576   512M EFI System
/dev/sda2  1050624 937701375 936650752 446.6G Linux filesystem


Disk /dev/sdb: 465.76 GiB, 500107862016 bytes, 976773168 sectors
Disk model: ST500LT012-1DG14
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 4096 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 4096 bytes / 4096 bytes
Disklabel type: gpt
Disk identifier: FE3316B8-B3AF-4416-96F6-7F42C41A5562

Device       Start       End   Sectors   Size Type
/dev/sdb1     2048   1050623   1048576   512M EFI System
/dev/sdb2  1050624 976771071 975720448 465.3G Microsoft basic data


Disk /dev/sdd: 3.61 GiB, 3879731200 bytes, 7577600 sectors
Disk model: USB Flash Drive 
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
Disklabel type: dos
Disk identifier: 0xf9f63ac3

Device     Boot   Start     End Sectors  Size Id Type
/dev/sdd1  *         64 1953791 1953728  954M  0 Empty
/dev/sdd2       1953792 2291711  337920  165M ef EFI (FAT-12/16/32)


Disk /dev/loop0: 794.42 MiB, 833007616 bytes, 1626968 sectors
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
```

The SSD or HDD can be identified by their models and sizes. In this case the installation drive will be ```PNY CS1311 480GB``` which is ```/dev/sda```.

Use fdisk to create the partitions.

```
fdisk /dev/sda
```

The 3 partitions suggested by the Arch installation guide are the next:

|Mount point on the installed system|Partition|Partition type|fdisk partition type number|Suggested size|
|-|-|-|-|-|
|/boot|/dev/efi_system_partition|EFI system partition|1|2 GiB|
|/|/dev/root_partition|Linux filesystem|20|Remainder of the device. At least 23–32 GiB.|

In fdisk you can list the known partition types by running the ```l``` command.

Create the GTP partition table and the partitions with the next commands:

Skip the swap partition, i might recreate this tutorial later, currently I'm using a btrfs swap file instead of a swap partition.

```
Welcome to fdisk (util-linux 2.40.2).
Changes will remain in memory only, until you decide to write them.
Be careful before using the write command.


Command (m for help): g
Created a new GPT disklabel (GUID: E583A9B4-E664-46D7-AB73-0AF69A4380BB).

Command (m for help): n
Partition number (1-128, default 1): 
First sector (2048-937703054, default 2048): 
Last sector, +/-sectors or +/-size{K,M,G,T,P} (2048-937703054, default 937701375): +1G

Created a new partition 1 of type 'Linux filesystem' and of size 1 GiB.
Partition #1 contains a vfat signature.

Do you want to remove the signature? [Y]es/[N]o: Y

The signature will be removed by a write command.

Command (m for help): t
Selected partition 1
Partition type or alias (type L to list all): 1
Changed type of partition 'Linux filesystem' to 'EFI System'.

Command (m for help): n
Partition number (2-128, default 2): 
First sector (2099200-937703054, default 2099200): 
Last sector, +/-sectors or +/-size{K,M,G,T,P} (2099200-937703054, default 937701375): +4G

Created a new partition 2 of type 'Linux filesystem' and of size 4 GiB.

Command (m for help): t
Partition number (1,2, default 2): 2
Partition type or alias (type L to list all): 19

Changed type of partition 'Linux filesystem' to 'Linux swap'.

Command (m for help): n
Partition number (3-128, default 3): 
First sector (10487808-937703054, default 10487808): 
Last sector, +/-sectors or +/-size{K,M,G,T,P} (10487808-937703054, default 937701375): 

Created a new partition 3 of type 'Linux filesystem' and of size 442.1 GiB.

Command (m for help): t
Partition number (1-3, default 3): 3
Partition type or alias (type L to list all): 23

Changed type of partition 'Linux filesystem' to 'Linux root (x86-64)'.

Command (m for help): p
Disk /dev/sda: 447.13 GiB, 480103981056 bytes, 937703088 sectors
Disk model: PNY CS1311 480GB
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
Disklabel type: gpt
Disk identifier: E583A9B4-E664-46D7-AB73-0AF69A4380BB

Device        Start       End   Sectors   Size Type
/dev/sda1      2048   2099199   2097152     1G EFI System
/dev/sda2   2099200  10487807   8388608     4G Linux swap
/dev/sda3  10487808 937701375 927213568 442.1G Linux root (x86-64)

Filesystem/RAID signature on partition 1 will be wiped.

Command (m for help): w
The partition table has been altered.
Calling ioctl() to re-read partition table.
Syncing disks.
```

#### Encrypt root partition

Only the ```/dev/sda3``` partition will be encrypted. Run the next command.

```sh
cryptsetup luksFormat /dev/sda3
```

Enter YES and write a passphrase. Output Example:

```
WARNING!
========
This will overwrite data on /dev/sda3 irrevocably.

Are you sure? (Type 'yes' in capital letters): YES
Enter passphrase for /dev/sda3: 
Verify passphrase: 
cryptsetup luksFormat /dev/sda3  19.69s user 0.36s system 84% cpu 23.678 total
```

Open the encrypted partition with the following command:

```sh
cryptsetup luksOpen /dev/sda3 root
```

Once the encrypted partition is open, you can see it with the ```lsblk``` command.

```
NAME     MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE  MOUNTPOINTS
loop0      7:0    0 794.4M  1 loop  /run/archiso/airootfs
sda        8:0    0 447.1G  0 disk  
├─sda1     8:1    0     1G  0 part  
├─sda2     8:2    0     4G  0 part  
└─sda3     8:3    0 442.1G  0 part  
  └─root 254:0    0 442.1G  0 crypt 
sdb        8:16   0 465.8G  0 disk  
├─sdb1     8:17   0   512M  0 part  
└─sdb2     8:18   0 465.3G  0 part  
sdc        8:32   1     0B  0 disk  
sdd        8:48   1   3.6G  0 disk  
├─sdd1     8:49   1   954M  0 part  
└─sdd2     8:50   1   165M  0 part  
```

#### Format partitions

Format the EFI partition.

```sh
mkfs.fat -F 32 /dev/sda1
```

The root partition must be formatted using the mapper.

```sh
mkfs.btrfs /dev/mapper/root
```

Output example:

```
btrfs-progs v6.10.1
See https://btrfs.readthedocs.io for more information.

Performing full device TRIM /dev/mapper/root (442.11GiB) ...
NOTE: several default settings have changed in version 5.15, please make sure
      this does not affect your deployments:
      - DUP for metadata (-m dup)
      - enabled no-holes (-O no-holes)
      - enabled free-space-tree (-R free-space-tree)

Label:              (null)
UUID:               b6c7770d-50e4-41ed-b332-1b1517a891cf
Node size:          16384
Sector size:        4096        (CPU page size: 4096)
Filesystem size:    442.11GiB
Block group profiles:
  Data:             single            8.00MiB
  Metadata:         DUP               1.00GiB
  System:           DUP               8.00MiB
SSD detected:       yes
Zoned device:       no
Features:           extref, skinny-metadata, no-holes, free-space-tree
Checksum:           crc32c
Number of devices:  1
Devices:
   ID        SIZE  PATH            
    1   442.11GiB  /dev/mapper/root
```

#### Btrfs subvolumes

Mount ```/dev/mapper/root``` before creating subvolumes.

```sh
mount /dev/mapper/root /mnt
```

Change to the ```/mnt``` directory.

```sh
cd /mnt
```

Create the root, home, log and swap subvolumes.

```sh
btrfs subvolume create @
btrfs subvolume create @home
btrfs subvolume create @log
btrfs subvolume create @swap
```

Create the directories for the snapshots and the broken snapshots.

```sh
mkdir -p snapshots snapshots/@ snapshots/@home
mkdir -p snapshots_broken snapshots_broken/@ snapshots_broken/@home
```

Exit from the ```/mnt``` directory and unmount it.

```sh
cd
umount /mnt
```

#### Mount the filesystems

Previously the subvolumes root and home were created, now they need to be mounted.

First mount the root subvolume.

```sh
mount -o noatime,subvol=@ /dev/mapper/root /mnt
```

Create the home directory and mount the @home subvolume.

```sh
mkdir -p /mnt/home
mount -o noatime,subvol=@home /dev/mapper/root /mnt/home
```

Create the log directory and mount the @log subvolume.

```sh
mkdir -p /mnt/var/log
mount -o noatime,subvol=@log /dev/mapper/root /mnt/var/log
```

Create boot directory and mount the boot partition.

```sh
mkdir /mnt/boot
mount -o noatime /dev/sda1 /mnt/boot
```

Create the swap directory and mount the @swap subvolume.

```sh
mkdir -p /mnt/swap
mount -o subvol=@swap /dev/mapper/root /mnt/swap
```

In order to enable hibernation, the swap file must be at least the size of the RAM. To show the RAM size run:

```sh
free -h
```

Create and enable the swap file. In this case the RAM size is 16 GiB.

```sh
btrfs filesystem mkswapfile --size 16g --uuid clear /mnt/swap/swapfile
```

Enable the swap file.

```sh
swapon /mnt/swap/swapfile
```

#### Select the mirrors

Select the mirrors of your contry using the next command:

```sh
reflector --country Mexico --latest 5 --age 12 --sort rate --save /etc/pacman.d/mirrorlist
```

#### Install essencial packages

Install essencial packages by running the next command, remember to change intel-ucode to amd-ucode in case the computer has and amd processor.

```sh
pacstrap -K /mnt base base-devel linux-lts linux-firmware linux-lts-headers btrfs-progs sudo intel-ucode amd-ucode networkmanager vim man-db man-pages texinfo dosfstools ntfs-3g pacman-contrib
```

#### Configure the system

Generate the fstab file.

```sh
genfstab -U /mnt >> /mnt/etc/fstab
```

Change root into the new system.

```sh
arch-chroot /mnt
```

Set the timezone.

```sh
ln -sf /usr/share/zoneinfo/America/Tijuana /etc/localtime
```

Run hwclock to generate /etc/adjtime

```sh
hwclock --systohc
```

Set the timezone with timedatectl.

```sh
timedatectl set-timezone America/Tijuana
```

Synchronize the clock by starting the ```systemd-timesyncd``` service.

```sh
systemctl start systemd-timesyncd.service
```

In order to configure localization, edit ```/etc/locale.gen``` and uncomment ```en_US.UTF-8 UTF-8``` and execute the next:

```sh
locale-gen
```

Create the locale.conf file.

```sh
echo "LANG=en_US.UTF-8" > /etc/locale.conf
```

Create the hostname file.

```sh
echo toshiba > /etc/hostname
```

#### Initramfs

Edit the ```/etc/mkinitcpio.conf``` file and add the encrypt hook.

```sh
vim /etc/mkinitcpio.conf
```

Make sure the ```encrypt``` hook is before ```filesystems``` hook. And the ```resume``` hook is before ```fsck``` and after ```filesystems```, this is necessary to enable hibernation.

```
HOOKS=(base udev autodetect microcode modconf kms keyboard keymap consolefont block encrypt filesystems resume fsck)
```

Then recreate the initramfs image.

```sh
mkinitcpio -P
```

Set the root password.

```sh
passwd
```

#### Set custom ACPI events

Edit the ```/etc/systemd/logind.conf``` file to customize the power button and lid switch actions.

```sh
vim /etc/systemd/logind.conf
```

Set the power button action to hibernate and the lid switch to do nothing.

```
HandlePowerKey=hibernate
HandleLidSwitch=ignore
```

#### (Optional) Create a user

Create a user with home directory and add it to the group wheel.

```sh
useradd --create-home --groups wheel demitroi
```

Set new password for the user.

```sh
passwd demitroi
```

Add the new user to the sudoers.

```sh
echo "demitroi ALL=(ALL:ALL) ALL" > /etc/sudoers.d/demitroi
```

In order to create the user directores install ```xdg-user-dirs```.

```sh
pacman -S xdg-user-dirs
```

Switch to the user and run

```sh
su demitroi
xdg-user-dirs-update
```

#### Install the systemd-boot loader

Systemd-boot comes with systemd package, so it's not necessary to install it.

Exec the next command to install it.

```sh
bootctl install --efi-boot-option-description="Arch Linux"
```

Create and edit the loader config file.

```sh
vim /boot/loader/loader.conf
```

Add the next content to it.

```
default  arch.conf
timeout  15
console-mode max
editor   no
```

Before creating the entries, use blkid to get the partition id of the LUKS partition.

```sh
blkid /dev/sda3
```

Output example:

```
/dev/sda3: UUID="8f0d30d4-1be6-4f7e-b9c1-4c4349cbdffd" TYPE="crypto_LUKS" PARTUUID="c293c947-881e-440c-b85c-859f19391b96"
```

Create the files of the loader entries.

```sh
mkdir -p /boot/loader/entries
```

Create and edit the arch.conf file.

```sh
vim /boot/loader/entries/arch.conf
```

Add the next content to it. The uuid is taken from the previous blkid command and the intel-ucode can be replaced with amd-ucode if the processor is amd.

```
title   Arch Linux
linux   /vmlinuz-linux-lts
initrd  /intel-ucode.img
initrd  /initramfs-linux-lts.img
options loglevel=3 verbose cryptdevice=UUID=8f0d30d4-1be6-4f7e-b9c1-4c4349cbdffd:root root=/dev/mapper/root rootflags=subvol=@ rw
```

Create the fallback entry, copy it from the previous file.

```sh
cp /boot/loader/entries/arch.conf /boot/loader/entries/arch-fallback.conf
```

Edit the ```arch-fallback.conf``` file.

```sh
vim /boot/loader/entries/arch-fallback.conf
```

Change the initrd line to use the fallback image.

```
title   Arch Linux (fallback initramfs)
linux   /vmlinuz-linux-lts
initrd  /intel-ucode.img
initrd  /initramfs-linux-lts-fallback.img
options loglevel=3 verbose cryptdevice=UUID=8f0d30d4-1be6-4f7e-b9c1-4c4349cbdffd:root root=/dev/mapper/root rootflags=subvol=@ rw
```

For more information refer to:

https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dm-crypt/System_configuration#Kernel_parameters

https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Power_management/Suspend_and_hibernate#Configure_the_initramfs

https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Kernel_parameters#Parameter_list

#### Create the initial snapshot

Once the system is installed, it's important to create the first snapshot to rollback to it in case something breaks.

First create the /mnt/btrfs directory.

```sh
mkdir -p /mnt/btrfs
```

Then mount the filesystem on it.

```sh
mount /dev/mapper/root /mnt/btrfs
```

Change to the /mnt/btrfs directory.

```sh
cd /mnt/btrfs
```

Create a read-only snapshot.

```sh
btrfs subvolume snapshot -r @ snapshots/@/$(date +%F_%H-%M-%S)
```

#### Post installation

Enable and start NetworkManager.

```sh
systemctl enable NetworkManager.service
systemctl start NetworkManager.service
```

It's recommended to see the next URL: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/General_recommendations

You can see my main readme for mor of my personal preferences

[readme.md](/readme.md)

Configure parallel downloads in pacman. Edit the ```/etc/pacman.conf``` file.

```sh
vim /etc/pacman.conf
```

Look for the ```ParallelDownloads``` option and set it to 5..

```sh
ParallelDownloads = 5
```
